[PDF p. 101]
          THE BLUES AND GREENS.          75

and  bullied by  his  clever and  unscrupulous  wife.
Unlike the great Duchess Sarah, Antonina never set
herself to thwart her mistress  ; but after Theodora's
death  she and  her  husband  lost  favour, and   in
declining  years knew much the same misfortune as
did the Marlboroughs.
  The year which saw the Persian War end [a.d. 532],
saw also the  rise and  fall of another danger, which
while  it  lasted was much more  threatening  to  the
Emperor's life and power.  We have already noticed
the "Blues" and " Greens," the great factions of the
Byzantine Circus.'  AH through the fifth century they
had been growing stronger, and  interfered more and
more  in  politics, and even  in  religious controversies.
To be a ''Green" in 530 meant  to be  a partisan  of
the  house  of the  late  Emperor Anastasius, and  a
Monophysite.2  The  " Blues " posed as partisans of
the house of  Justinus, and  as strictly orthodox  in
matters  ecclesiastical.   From  mere  Circus  factions
they had  almost grown  into  political  parties  ;  but
they still retained at the bottom many traces of their
low  sporting  'origin.   The  rougher  elements  pre-
dominated  in them  ; they  were  prone  to  riot and
mischief, and, as the events of 532 were to show, they
were a serious danger to the State.
  In January of that year there was serious rioting in
the streets.   Justinian, though ordinarily he favoured
the  Blue  faction,  impartially  ordered  the  leaders
of the  rioters on  both  sides  to  be  put  to death.

    * See chap.  ii. p. 22.
   ^ To hold the view which denied the existence both of a truly human
and a truly Divine nature in Our Lord Jesus Christ.

[PDF p. 102]
76                yUSTINIAN.

Seven were selected for execution, and  four of them
were duly beheaded  in the presence of a great and
angry mob,  in  front of the monastery of  St. Conon.
The last three rioters were to be hung, but the hang-
man so bungled  his task  that two of the criminals,
one a Blue the other a Green, fell to the ground alive.
The guards seized them and they were again sus-
                                               to the terrorpended   ; but once more—owing no doubt
of the executioners  at the  menaces of the mob
the rope slipped.  Then the multitude broke  loose,
the  guards were swept  away, and  the  half-hung
criminals were thrust into sanctuary at the adjacent
monastery.
  This exciting incident proved the commencement
of six  days  of desperate  rioting.   The  Blues and
Greens united, and taking as their watchword, Nzka^
" conquer," swept through the city, crying  for the de-
position of John of Cappadocia, the unpopular finance
minister, and of Eudemius, Praefect of the city, who
was immediately responsible for the executions.  The
ordinary police of the capital were quite unable  to
master them, and Justinian was weak enough  to pro-
mise to dismiss the  officials.  But the mob was now
quite  out  of  hand,  and  refused  to  disperse   :  the
trouble was fomented by the partisans of the house of
the late emperor, who began to shout  for the deposi-
tion  of  Justinian, and  wished  to make  Hypatius,
nephew of Anastasius, Caesar in his stead.  The city   ^^
was almost empty of troops, owing to the garrison
having been sent to the Persian War.    . The Emperor
could  only  count  on  4,000 men  of  the  Imperial
Guard, a  few German  auxiliaries, and  a  regiment

[PDF p. 103]
              THB NIKA  RIOT.               yy

of 500 " Cataphracti," mailed horsemen, under Beli-
sarius, who had just returned from the seat of war.
  BeHsarius was placed  in command of the  whole,
and sallied out to clear the  streets, but the  rioters,
showing the same pluck that the Byzantine mob dis-
played against the soldiers of Gainas a hundred and
twenty-five years before,  offered a stout  resistance.
The main  fighting  took  place  around  the  great
square  of the Augustaeum,  between  the  Imperial
palace and  the  Hippodrome.   In  the  heat of the
fight  the  rebels  set  fire  to  the  Brazen  Porch by
the Senate House.  The Senate House caught  fire,
and  then the conflagration  spread  east and north,
till  it was wafted across  the square to  St.  Sophia.
On the  third  day  of the  riot the  great  cathedral
was burnt to the ground, and from thence the flames
issued out to burn the hospital of Sampson and the
church of St.  Irene.^  The fire checked the fighting,
and the insurgents were now  in possession of most
of the  city.  But they could  not  find  their chosen
leader,  for the unfortunate  Hypatius, who had  no
desire to risk his neck, had  taken  refuge with the
Emperor  in  the  palace.    It was  not   till  he was
actually driven out by Justinian, who feared  to have
him  about  his  person,  that  this  rebel  in  spite of
himself,  fell  into the hands of  his own  adherents.
But on the sixth day of the^ riots they led him to the
Hippodrome, installed him  in the royal seat of the
Kathisma, and crowned him there with a gold chain
of his wife's, for want of a proper diadem.
  Meanwhile  there was  dismay  and  diversity  of
                                          * See map on p. 20.

[PDF p. 104]
             THEODORA I\h'Klw\TRIX.
[J^rom the Painting by Val. Prinscp.      'J 'he copytHght is in thf
                         Artist's hands.']

[PDF p. 105]
             THEODORA'S SPEECH.           79

councils  in  the  Palace.   John  of Cappadocia and
many other ministers strove to persuade the Emperor
to  fly by sea, and gather additional troops at Hera-
clea.  There was nothing  left  in  his power save the
palace, and they insisted  that  if he remained there
longer he would be surrounded by the rebels and cut
off from escape.    It was then that the Empress Theo-
dora rose to the level of the occasion, refused to fly,
and urged her husband to make one final assault on
the enemy.  Her words are preserved by Procopius.
     *' This is no occasion to keep to the old rule that a
woman must not speak in the council.  Those who
are most concerned have most  right to dictate the
course of action.  Now every man must die once, and
for  a king death  is  better than dethronement and
exile.  May I never see the day when my purple robe
is stripped from me, and when   I am no more called
Lady and Mistress  !   If you wish, O Emperor, to save
your life, nothing is easier  : there are your ships and
the  sea.   But / agree  with  the  old  saying  that


' Empire is the best winding-sheet.'
  Spurred  on by  his  wife's  bold words,  Justinian
ordered a last assault on the rebels, and Belisarius led
out his full force.  The factions were now in the Hip-
podrome,  saluting  their  newly-crowned  leader with
shouts of    '' Hypatie  Atigtiste,  tu vmcas," preparatory
to a final attack on the palace.   Belisarius attacked
at once  all  three  gates  of  the Hippodrome  : that
directed against the door of the Kathisma  failed, but
the soldiery forced both the side entrances, and after a
hard struggle the rebels were entirely routed. Crowded
into  the enormous  building  with  only  five  exits,

[PDF p. 106]
8o                yU6TINIAN,

they fell In thousands by the swords of the victorious
Imperialists.   It is said that 35,000 men were slain in
the six days of this great " Sedition of Nika."
   It  is curious  to  learn  that  not  even  this  awful
slaughter succeeded  in crushing the  factions.  We
hear of the Blues and Greens  still rioting on various
occasions during the next fifty years.  But they never
came again so near to changing the course of history
as in the famous rising of A.D. 532.