[PDF p. 61]
                THE HUNS,                 35

  But a totally unexpected series of events were now
to show how prescient Constantine had been, in rear-
ing  his great  fortress-capital  to serve as the central
place of arms of the Balkan Peninsula.
  About the year A.D. 372  the Huns, an enormous
Tartar horde from beyond the Don and Volga, burst*
into the  lands  north of the Euxine, and began  to
work their way westward.  The first tribe that lay in
their way, the nomadic race of the Alans, they almost
exterminated.  Then they fell upon the Goths.  The
Ostrogoths made a desperate attempt  to defend the
line of the Dniester against the oncoming savages
" men with  faces that can  hardly be called  faces
rather shapeless black collops of flesh with little points
instead of eyes   ;  little in stature, but  lithe and active,
skilful  in  riding, broad shouldered, good at the bow,
stiff-necked and proud, hiding under a barely human
form the ferocity of the wild beast."  But the enemy
whom the Gothic historian describes  in these unin-
viting terms was too strong  for the Teutons of the
East.  The Ostrogoths were crushed and compelled
to become vassals of the Huns, save a remnant who
fought their way southward  to the Wallachian shore,
near the marshes of the Delta of the Danube.  Then
the Huns fell on the Visigoths. The wave of invasion
pressed on   ; the Bug and the Pruth proved no barrier
to the swarms of nomad bowman, and the Visigoths,
under their Duke Fritigern, fell back in dismay with
their wives and children, their waggons and flocks
and herds, till they found themselves with their backs
to the Danube.  Surrender to the enemy was more
dreadful  to  the  Visigoths  than  to  their  eastern

[PDF p. 62]
36      THE FIGHT WITH THE GOTHS.

brethren   ; they were more civilized, most of them were
Christians, and  the  prospect of slavery to  savages
seems to have appeared intolerable to them.
  Pressed against the Danube and the Roman border,
the Visigoths  sent  in despair to ask permission  to
cross from  the  Emperor. A  contemporary  writer
describes how they stood.   " All  the multitude that
had  escaped  from  the murderous savagery  of the
              less  than  200,000 fighting men, besidesHuns—no
women and old men and children —were there on the
river  bank,  stretching  out  their  hands  with  loud
lamentations, and  earnestly  supplicating  leave  to
cross, bewailing  their calamity, and  promising that
they would  ever  faithfully adhere  to  the  imperial
alliance if only the boon was granted them."
  At this moment (A.D. 376) the Roman Empire was
again divided.  The house of Constantine was  gone,
and the East was ruled by Valens, a stupid, cowardly,
and avaricious prince, who had obtained  the diadem
and half the Roman world only because he was the
brother of  Valentinian, the greatest general  of the
day.  Valentinian had taken the West for his portion,
and  dwelt  in  his camp on  the  Rhine and Upper
Danube, while Valens, slothful and timid, shut him-
self up with a court of slaves and  flatterers  in the
imperial palace at Constantinople.
  The  proposal  of  the  Goths   filled  Valens  with
dismay.   It was  difficult  to  say which was more
                 refuse a passage  to 200,000 desperatedangerous—to
men with arms  in  their hands and  a savage foe at
 their backs, or to admit them within the line of river
and fortress that protected the border, with an implied

[PDF p. 63]
          VALENS AND THE GOTHS,          37

obligation to find land for them.  After much doubt-
ing he  chose  the  latter  alternative  :   if the Goth^
would give hostages, and surrender  their arms, they
should be ferried across the Danube and permitted to
settle as subject-allies within the empire.
  The Goths accepted the terms, gave up the sons of
their chiefs as hostages, and streamed across the river
as fast as the Roman Danube-flotilla could transport
them.  But no sooner had they reached Moesia than
troubles broke out.  The Roman officials at first tried
to disarm the immigrants, but the Goths were un-
willing to surrender their weapons, and offered large
bribes to be allowed  to  retain them  ;  in  strict  dis-
obedience to the E,mperor's  orders, the bribes were
accepted and the Goths retained their arms.   Further
disputes soon broke out.  The provisions of Moesia
did not suffice for so many hundred thousand mouths
as had  just  entered   its  border, and  Valens  had
ordered stores of corn from Asia to be collected  for
the use of the Goths, till they should have received
and commenced  to cultivate land of their own.  But
the governor, Lupicinus, to  fill  his own pockets, held
back the food, and doled out what he chose to give
at  exorbitant  prices.   In  sheer hunger the Goths
were driven to barter a slave for a single loaf of bread
and ten pounds of silver for a sheep.  This shameless
extortion  continued  as  long as  the stores and the
patience  of  the Goths  lasted.  At  last  the  poorer
immigrants were actually beginning to sell their own
children for slaves rather than let them  starve.  This
drove the Goths to desperation, and a chance affray
set the whole nation in a blaze.  Fritigern, with many

[PDF p. 64]
38       THE FIGHT WITH THE GOTHS.

of his nobles, was dining with Count Lupicinus at the
town  of  Marcianopolis, when some  starving Goths
tried  to  pillage the market  by  force.  A party  of
Roman soldiers strove to drive them  off, and were at
once mishandled or  slain.  On  hearing the  tumult
and learning  its cause, Lupicinus recklessly bade his
retinue seize and slay Fritigern and the other guests
at  his banquet.  The Goths drew their swords and
cut their way out of the palace.  Then riding to the
nearest camp of his followers, Fritigern told  his  tale,
and bade them take up arms against Rome.
  There followed  a year of desperate  fighting   all
along the Danube,  and  the  northern  slope  of the
Balkans. The Goths half-starved for many months, and
smarting under the extortion and chicanery to which
they had been subjected, soon showed that the old
barbarian spirit was but thinly covered by the veneer
of Christianity and  civilization  vv'hich they had  ac-
quired in the last half-century.  The struggle resolved
itself into a repetition of the great raids of the third
century   : towns were sacked and  the open country
harriod in the old style, nor was the war rendered less
fierce by the fact that many runaway slaves and other
 outcasts among the provincial population joined the
 invaders.  But the Roman armies still retained their
 old  reputation    ;  the  ravages  of  the  Goths  were
checked at the Balkans, and though joined by the
remnants of the Ostrogoths from the Danube mouth,
as well as by other tribes flying from the Huns, the
Visigoths were at  first held  at bay by the imperial
armies. A desperate pitched  battle  at Ad  Salices,
near the modern  Kustendje thinned  the ranks of
both sides, but led to no decisive result.

[PDF p. 65]
            OUTBREAK OF WAR.             39

  Next  year,  however,  the  unwarhke  Emperor,
driven into the field by the clamours of his subjects,
took the  field  in  person, with  great reinforcements
brought from Asia  Minor.  At the same time  his
nephew Gratian, a gallant young prince who had suc-
ceeded to the Empire of the West, set forth through
Pannonia to bring  aid to the lands  of the Lower
Danube.
  The personal intervention of Valens in the struggle
was followed by a  fearful  disaster.   In 378 A.D., the
main body of the Goths succeeded in forcing the  line
of the Balkans   ; they were not  far from Adrianople
when  the Emperor  started  to attack them, with a
splendid army of 60,000 men.  Every one expected to
hear of a victory, for the reputation of invincibility
still clung to the legions, and after six hundred years
of war the disciplined infantry of Rome, robur peditumy
whose day had lasted since the Punic wars, were  still
reckoned superior, when fairly handled, to any amount
of wild barbarians.
  But a new chapter of the history of the art of war
was  just commencing  ;  during their sojourn  in  the
plains of South Russia and Roumania the Goths had
taken, first of all German races, to fighting on horse-  ^
back.   Dwelling  in  the Ukraine they had  felt the
influence of that land, ever the nurse of cavalry from
the day of the Scythian  to that of the Tartar and
Cossack.   They had come  to  " consider   it  more
honourable to fight on horse than on foot," and every
chief was followed by his war-band of mounted men.
Driven against their will into conflict with the empire^
they found themselves face to face into the army that

[PDF p. 66]
40       THE FIGHT WITH THE GOTHS.

had so long held the world  in  fear, and had turned
back their own  ancestors  in  rout three generations
before
  Valens found the main body of the Goths encamped
in a great "laager," on the plain north of Adrianople.
After some abortive  negotiations he developed  an
attack on  their front, when suddenly a great body of
horsemen charged  in on the Roman  flank.   It was
the main strength of the Gothic cavalry, which had
been foraging  at a distance   ; receiving news of the
fight it had ridden straight for the battle field.  Some
Roman squadrons which covered the left flank of the
Emperor's army  were  ridden down  and trampled
under  foot.  Then the Goths swept down on  the
infantry of the left wing, rolled  it up, and drove  it in
upon the centre.  So tremendous was  their impact
that  legions and cohorts were  pushed  together  in
hopeless confusion.   Every attempt to  stand  firm
failed, and in a few minutes  left, centre, and  reserve,
were one undistinguishable mass.   Imperial guards,
light troops,  lancers,  auxiliaries, and  infantry of the
line were wedged together in a press that grew closer
every moment.  The Roman  cavalry saw that the
day was  lost, and rode  ofT without another  effort.
Then the abandoned infantry realized  the horror of
their position   :  equally unable  to deploy or  to  fly,
they had to stand to be cut down.  Men could  not
raise their arms to strike a blow, so closely were they
packed   ; spears snapped right and  left, their bearers
being unable to lift them to a vertical position   ; many
soldiers were stifled in the press.   Into this quivering
mass the Goths rode, plying lance and sword against

[PDF p. 67]
         THE BATTLE OF ADRIANOPLE,        41

 the helpless enemy.  It was not till forty thousand men
 had fallen that the thinning of the ranks enabled the
 survivors to break out and  follow their cavalry in a
 headlong flight.  They left behind them, dead on the
 field, the Emperor, the Grand Masters of the Infantry
 and Cavalry, the Count of the Palace, and thirty-five
commanders of different corps.
  The  battle  of Adrianople was  the most  fearful
 defeat  suffered by a Roman army  since Cannae, a
 slaughter to which  it  is aptly compared by the con-
temporary  historian Ammianus  Marcellinus.   The
army of the East was  almost annihilated, and was
 never reorganized again on the old Roman lines.
   This awful catastrophe brought down on Constanti-
nople the  first attack which  it experienced  since  it
had changed its name from Byzantium.  After a vain
assault on Adrianople, the victorious Goths pressed
rapidly on towards the imperial  city.  Harrying the
whole country side as they passed by, they presented
themselves  before  the  " Golden  Gate,"   its  south-
western exit.  But the attack was destined  to come
to nothing   :  " their courage  failed them when they
looked on the vast circuit of walls and the enormous
extent of streets  ;  all  that  mass  of  riches within
appeared  inaccessible to them.  They cast away the
siege machines which they had prepared, and  rolled
backward on to Thrace." ^ Beyond skirmishing under
the walls with a body of Saracen cavalry which had
been brought up  to strengthen  the  garrison, they
made no hostile attempt on the  city.  So forty years
after his death, Constantine's prescience was for the
                                   * Ammianus Marcellinus.