[PDF p. 169]
        DECAY OF THE LATIN TONGUE.       I43

ac often as in the Greek which must have been more
familiar to them.  Ammianus Marcellinus may serve
as a  fair example  : born  in Greece, he wrote in the
tongue  of the  ruling  race rather than  in  his own
idiom.  Moreover there was  still  in the lands east of
the Adriatic  a  very  large body of  Latin-speaking
                                  all the inhabitants of the  in-population—comprising
land  of the  Balkan  peninsula,  for,  except Greece
proper, Macedonia, and a scattered line of cities along
the Thracian  coast,  the whole  land  had  learnt  to
speak the tongue of its conquerors.
  By the seventh century this Roman element was
rapidly vanishing.  It is true that the Emperor was still
hailed  as the  " Pius, Felix,  Perpetuus, Augustus "  :
it was not  till about A.D. 800 that he dropped  the
old  style and  called  himself  " 'Ev Xptarcp  ttlo-to^
ySao-fcXeu? TMv  'PcofjLaicov."  Nor were the old Roman
official titles yet disused   : men were still tribunes and
patricians, counts and praetors, but  little more than
the names survived.   Already  in the sixth century
a knowledge  of Latin was growing  unusual  even
among educated men.  The author Johannes Lydus
 tells  us  that  he owed  his  rise  in the  civil service
 mainly to  this  rare accomplishment.   Procopius, the
 best writer of the day and a man  of real merit and
 discernment, was absolutely ignorant of the rudiments
 of Latin, and blunders when he  tries to translate the
 simplest phrase.   Justinian was the last emperor who
 spoke Latin as his mother tongue, all his successors
 were better skilled in Greek.
  The gradual disuse of Latin has  its  origin  in the
 practical—though not  formal—solution of the con-

[PDF p. 170]
     144       SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS LIFE.
      tinuity between Rome and the  East, which began
     with the division  of  the empire between  the  sons
     of Constantine and  became  more  complete  after
     Odoacer made himself King of Italy in 476.   In the
     course of a century and a half the Latin element  in
     the East, cut off from  the Latin-speaking West, was
     bound to yield before the predominant Greek.   But
      the process would have been slower  if the Eastern
     provinces  which spoke  Latin  had  not  been  those
     which suffered most from the barbarians.  The Visi-
     goths and  Ostrogoths harassed and decimated  the
     Thracians,  Illyrians, and Moesians, but the Slavs a
     century later almost exterminated them.   In A.D. 400
     probably  a quarter of the  provincials  east  of the
      Adriatic spoke Latin   ;  in A.D. 620 not a tenth.  The
     Romanized lands of the Balkan peninsula had now
     become Slavonic  principalities   : only the Dalmatian
      seaports and a few scattered survivors in the Balkans
        still used the old tongue.  The only districts where
      a considerable Latin-speaking population obeyed the
     Emperor were Africa and the Italian Exarchate, now
      reunited  to  Constantinople  by  the  conquests  of
      Justinian.   But they seem  to have been too remote
     from  the  centre  of  life  and  government  to  have
      exercised any influence or delayed the de- Romanizing
      of the East.  The last  notable author, who being a
      subject of the empire wrote  in  Latin  as  his native
      tongue, was the po^t Flavius Corippus who addressed
      a long panegyric to Justinus II.   : as might have been
      expected, he was an African.^^
       While the empire was losing its Roman character-j^
        istics, it was at the same time growing more and more

[PDF p. 171]
        CHRISTIANITY AND THE STATE.      I45

Christian at heart. Under Constantine and his imme-
diate successors  the machinery of government was
only just beginning to be effected by the change of the
emperor's religion.  Though the sovereign personally
was Christian, the system remained what it had been
before.  Many of the high  officials were still pagans,
and the form and spirit of all administrative and legal
business was unaltered from what  it had been  in the
third century.   It is not till forty years after Constan-
tine's death that we find the Christian spirit fully pene-
trating out of the spiritual into the material sphere of
life.  Attempts by the State to suppress moral sin no
less than legal crime begin with Theodosius L, whose
crusade against sexual immorality would have been
incomprehensible  to  even  the  best  of  the pagan
emperors.  The old  gladiatorial  shows, one of the
most characteristic and repulsive features  of Roman
life, were abdished not long  after.  They survived
for  sixty  years  at Rome,  though  Christian  Con-
stantinople never knew them.  But this was not the
work of the  State, but of a single  individual.  One
day in A.D. 404 the games had begun, and the gladi-
ators were about  to engage, when the monk Tele-
machus leapt down into the arena and threw himself
between the combatants, adjuring them not to slay
their brethren.  There was an angry scuffle, and the
good monk was slain.  But his death had the effect
that his protests might have  failed  to bring about,/y/
and no gladiatorial show was ever given again.               l. /vyjCx
   In  other  provinces  of  social   life  the  work  of   ^^^^^
Christianity was no less marked.    It put an end to
the detestable practice of infanticide which pervaded


                                     1

[PDF p. 172]
Sea NYe
iaeae sausunrenscsussa1 aEs)
|iti
nnn ay
| é
e/a ell isanSandJf f
a ANUmma
S|
fem §
by = MUITENLTEULTNNTTATANTUAATT ainral :
Vgc
2
\mmm aL
.
et
at AL |
E os Mfrs palit pasit
zZ
Nese”
oe
=F| ees, pareve
i mat =/e RL ee


[PDF p. 173]
         CHRISTIANITY AND SLAVERY.        I47

the ancient world, resting on the assumption that the
father had the right to decide whether or not he would
rear the  child he had begotten.  Constantine made
the State assume the charge of feeding and  rearing
the children of the destitute, lest their parents should
be tempted  to cast them  forth to perish in the old
fashion, and Valentinian  I. in 374 assimilated infanti-
cide to other forms of murder, and made it a capital
offence.
  Slavery  was  also  profoundly  affected  by  the
teaching of the Church.  The ancient world, save a
few philosophers, had regarded the slave with such
contempt that he was hardly reckoned a moral being
or conceived to have rights or  virtues.   Christianity
taught that he was a man with an immortal  soul, no
less  than  his own  master, and  bade  slaves and
freemen meet on terms  of perfect  equality around
the baptismal font and before the sacred  table.    It
was from the first taught that the man who manu-
mitted his slaves earned the approval of heaven, and
 all occasions of rejoicing, public and private, were fitly ^k
commemorated by the  liberation of deserving indi-
 viduals.  Though slavery was  not extinguished  for
 centuries,    its   evils  were   immensely   modified     ;
 Justinian's legislation shows that by his time public
 opinion had condemned  the  characteristic  evils of
 ancient  slavery   : he permitted  the  intermarriage of
 slaves and  free  persons,  stipulating  only  for  the
 consent  of  the owner of the servile partner  in the
 wedlock.  He declared the  children  of such mixed
 marriages  free, and  he made the  prostitution of a
 slave by a  master a  criminal  offence.   Hereditary

[PDF p. 174]
148       SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS LIFE.

slavery became almost unknown, and the  institution
was only kept up by the introduction of barbarian
captives, heathens and  enemies, whose position did
not appeal so keenly to the mind of their captors.
  The improvement  of  the  condition  of  all  the
unhappy classes of which we have been speaking
                                                 directlywomen,  infants,  slaves, gladiators—can be
traced back to a single fundamental  Christian  truth.
It was the belief in the importance of the individual
human soul in the eyes of God that led the converted
Roman to  realize  his  responsibility, and change his
attitude towards the helpless beings whom  he had
before despised and neglected.   It is only fair to add
that  the  realization  of  this  central  truth  did  not
always operate for good  in the Roman world of the
fifth and sixth centuries.  Some of the developments
of the new idea were harmful and even dangerous to
the  State.   They  took  the  form  of  laying  such
exclusive  stress on the  relations between the  indi-
vidual  soul and heaven, that the  duties of man  to
the State were half  forgotten.  Chief among these
developments  was  the  ascetic  monasticism  which,
starting  from  Egypt,  spread  rapidly  all  over  the
empire, more  especially over  its  eastern  provinces.
When men retire from  their duties as  citizens, intent
on nothing but on saving their own  souls, take up a
position outside  the  State, and  cease  to be of the
slightest use to society, the result may be harmless so
long as their numbers are small.  But at this time the
monastic impulse was working on such a large scale
that  its development was positively dangerous.   It
was by thousands and ten thousands that the men

[PDF p. 175]
            EVILS OF MONAS

who ought to have been bearing the burdens of the
State,  stepped  aside  into  the  monastery  or  the
hermit's cave.  The ascetics of the fifth century had
neither of the justifications which made monasticism
precious in a later age, they were neither missionaries
nor men of learning.  The monastery did not devote
itself either to sending out preachers and teachers, or
to  storing up and  cherishing the literary treasures
of the ancient  world.  The first abbot to whom   it
occurred  to  turn  the  vast leisure of his monks to
good account by setting them systematically to work
at  copying  manuscripts was  Cassiodorus,  the  ex-
secretary to King Theodoric the Goth [a.d. 530-40].
Before  his time monks  and  books had no special
connection with each other.                        ^^^
  When a State contains masses of men who devote
their whole energies to a repulsively selfish attempt
to save their own individual  souls, while letting the
world around them slide on as best  it may, then the
body politic is diseased.  The Roman Empire  in  its
fight with the  barbarians was  in no small degree
hampered by this attitude of so many of  its subjects.
The ascetic took the barbarian invasions as judgments
from heaven  rightly inflicted upon  a wicked world,
and not as national calamities which called on every
citizen to join in the attempt to repel them.  Many
men complacently interpreted the troubles of the fifth
century as the tribulations predicted  in the Apoca-
lypse, and watched them develop with something like
joy, since they must portend the close approach of
the Second Advent of our Lord.
  This apathetic attitude of many Christians during

[PDF p. 176]
   150      SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS LIFE,

    the afflictions of the empire was maddening to the
   heathen  minority  which   still  survived among  the
   educated classes.  They roundly accused Christianity^
    of being  the  ruin  of  tlie  State by  its  anti-social  \
    teaching which led men  to neglect every duty of the                         J
     citizen.  The  Christian  author Oros'us  felt  himself
   compelled  to write a lengthy history to confute this
    view,  aiming  his  work  at  the pagan Symmachus
   whose book  had  been  devoted  to  tracing  all  the
    calamities  of  the  world   to   the  conversion   of
    Constantine.r
        It was fortunate for the empire that  its governing
    classes  continued  to  preserve the  old traditions of
   Roman  state- craft, and fought on doggedly against
     all the ills of their time—barbarian invasion, famine,
   and  pestilence,  instead  of bowing  to the yoke and
    recognizing in every calamity the righteous judgment
    of heaven and the indication of the approaching end
    of the world.
     Paganism had  practically disappeared by the end
    of the  fifth century as an  active force   ; none save a
    few philosophers made an open  profession of  it, and
     in 529 Justinian put a formal end to their teaching, by
    closing the schools of Athens, the  last refuge of the
    professors  of  the  expiring  religion.   But  if open
    heathenism was dead, a large measure of indifferent-
    ism prevailed among the educated classes  : many men
   who in the fifth century would have been pagans were
    Christians in name  in the sixth, but little affected by
     Christianity in their lives.  This type was extremely
   common among the literary and official classes. There
     are plenty of sixth-century authors—Procopius may