[PDF p. 241]
               XVIL
  THE LITERARY EMPERORS AND THEIR TIME.

                      (A.D. ^^6-<)6z.)
  The  eighty years which  followed  the  death  of
Basil the Macedonian were the most uneventful and
monotonous  in  the whole  history  of  the  empire.
They are entirely taken up by the two long reigns
of Leo the Wise and Constantine Porphyrogenitus,^
the son and grandson of the founder of the dynasty.
Basil had been a mere adventurer, an ignorant and
uneducated but  capable  upstart.  His  successors
                                       a pair of mild,strange issue from such a stock—were
easy-going, and inoffensive men of literature.  They
wrote no annals with their sword, though the times
were  not  unpropitious  for military  enterprise,  but
devoted themselves to the pen, and have left behind
them some of the most useful and interesting works
in Byzantine literature.
   If the times had been harder  it is doubtful whether

    * This name was given him because he was born in the Purple
Chamber, the room in the palace set aside for the Empress.   Emperors
born in their father's reign had been scarce of late, Constantine VI. and
Michael the Drunkard  were  the only two  in  the lio years before
Constantine VII.

[PDF p. 242]
2l6 THE LITERARY EMPERORS AND THEIR TIME.

Leo VI. and Constantine VII. would have been strong
enough to protect their throne.  But the period 880-
960 was less-4fouljled by fareign_JV¥ars than any other
corresponding  period  in  the  hi.^tory of the  East-
Roman state.  The empire of the Caliphs was break-
                       empire of Charles the Greating up in the East—the
had already broken up  in the West—the Bulgarians
and other neighbours of the realm on the north were
being converted to Christianity, and settling down into
quiet.  The only troubles to which the East-Roman
realm was exposed were piratical raids of the Russians
on the north and the Saracens of Africa on the south.
These were vexatious, but not dangerous.  An active
and warlike emperor would probably have found the
time propitious for conquest from his neighbours, but
Leo and Constantine were quiet, unenterprising men,
who dwelt contentedly  in the palace, and seldom or
never took the field.
  Leo's reign of twenty-six years was only diversified
by an unfortunate invasion of Bulgaria, which failed
through the mismanagement of the generals, and for a
great raid of Saracen pirates on Thessalonica  in 904.
The capture of the second city of the empire by a fleet
of African adventurers was an incident disgraceful to
the administration  of Leo, and caused much outcry
and sensation.  But  it is fair to say that it was taken
almost by surprise, and stormed from the side of the
sea where no attack had been expected.  The armies
and fleet of the empire would have availed to rescue
the town  if only its fall had been delayed a few weeks.
When they had taken  it the Saracens fled with their
booty, and made no attempt to hold its walls.

[PDF p. 243]
                                                                                                                                                         ;

         REIGN OF CONSTANTINE  VII.       217

   Constantine Porphyrogenitus, the  offspring of the
 fourth wife of Leo the Wise, and the child of his old
 age, was  only seven when  his heritage  fell to him.
 For many years he was under the tutelage of guardians
 first  his  father's  brother Alexander  ruled  as  his



                                                                                                                                                                                          - colleague, and became emperor-regent.                                Some years
 after Alexander had died an ambitious admiral named
 Romanus  Lecapenus  usurped  the  same  position,
 declared  himself  emperor,  and  administered  the
 realm.  The  life  of Romanus was  protracted  into
 extreme old age, long after Constantine had reached
 his majority  ; but the ambitious veteran held tight to
 the sceptre, and kept  the  rightful  heir in the back-
 ground.   Constantine consoled  himself by writing
 books and painting pictures   ;  it was not  till he was
 nearly i^y. that he came to his own.  Even then his
 success was not owing  to  his own energy  ; the sons
 of the aged Romanus had  resolved  to succeed their
parent  on  the  throne,  in  despite of the  rights of
Constantine.  But when  they  declared  themselves
emperors  and made  their  old  father  abdicate,  an
outburst of popular wrath was provoked.  The mob
and the guards joined to sweep away the presumptuous
Stephen  Lecapenus  and  his  brother.  They were
immured in monasteries, and Constantine emerged from
his seclusion  to  administer the empire  for twenty
years.  He was somewhat weak and ineffective, but
neither obstinate nor tyrannical  ; many abler men
made worse rulers.
  The chief achievements of both Leo and Constan-
tine were  their hooks.  Those of Leo  consist of a
manual on the Art of War, some theological treatises,

[PDF p. 244]
                                                                                                                                                       ;

2l8 THE LITERARY EMPERORS AND THEIR TIME.

and  a book of prophecies, a  collection  of political
enigmas, which were long the puzzle and admiration
of the East.i  The first-named work is most valuable
and interesting, bringing down the history of military-
organization, tactics, and strategy to Leo's own time,
and giving us a perfect picture of the Byzantine army
and  its  tactics, as well  as  incidental sketches of all
the enemies with which it had to contend.  The back-
bone of the force was still the'* themes " or " turmae '*
of heavy cavalry, of which every province had one.
The number of the provinces had been much increased
since the days of the emperors of the house of Heraclius,
and this implied a corresponding increase in the troops.
They were raised from  subjects of the empire and
officered  by  the  Byzantine  nobility,  for  as  Leo
observed,  " There  was  no  difficulty  in  obtaining
officers of good birth and private means, whose origin
made them  respected by the  soldiery, while  their
money enabled them  to win the good graces of their
men by many gifts of small  creature comforts, over
and above  their pay."  The names of some of the
great  noble  houses  are found  for generation  after
generation  in the imperial muster rolls, such as those
of Ducas,  Phocas, Comnenus, Bryennius,  Kerkuas,
Diogenes, and many more.  The pages of Leo's work
breathe an entire confidence in the power of the army
to deal with any foe  ; against  Saracen, Turk, Hun-
 garian, and Slav, instant and decisive action  is advised
when caught, they should be fought and beaten.   It

     * There is a splendid copy of this book in the Bodleian T>ibrary, made
 as late as 1560, where all the prophecies are applied  to the Turks and
 Venetians.

[PDF p. 245]
                 LEO'S TACTICA.              219

 is only when dealing v/ith the men of the West, the
Franks and Lombards, that Leo recommends caution
and  deprecates any rash engagement  in a general
 action, preferring to wear the enemy down by cutting
off his  supplies  and  harassing  his  marches.  We
gather a very favourable impression of the Byzantine
army from Leo's book  ;  it was organized, armed, and
supplied in a manner that has no parallel till modern
times.  Each regiment possessed  its special uniform,
and was equipped with regularity.  There was none
of that variety in arms and organizations which was
the bane of mediaeval armies.  The regiments had
each attached to them an elaborate military train, a
small body of engineers, and a provision of surgeons
and ambulances. To encourage the saving of wounded
men, Leo tells us that the bearer company was given
a gold piece for every disabled soldier whom it brought
off the field after a lost battle.   It would be hard to
find any similar care shown  for the wounded till the
days of our own century.
  The Byzantine fleet, as Leo describes  it, had for its
chief object the maintenance of the police of the seas
in the Aegean, Levant, and South Italian waters.   Its
enemies were the Saracens of the Syrian and African
coasts, and more especially the troublesome Corsairs
of Crete, who were often beaten but never subdued
till  Nicephorus Phocas exterminated them in 961.
The empire maintained three fleets, small ones in the
Black Sea and  in Western waters   ; but the largest in
the Aegean. This was composed of sixty " dromonds,"
or war-vessels of the largest rating  ; their great depot
was in the arsenal at Constantinople, but they could

[PDF p. 246]
220 THE LITERARY EMPERORS AND THEIR TIME.

also be refitted  at Samos, Thessalonica, and  several
other ports.  Owing to their superior  size, and  still
more  to  their employment of the  celebrated Greek
fire, the imperial fleets generally had the better of the
Saracen, but though they checked his larger squadrons,
they could never suppress the petty piracy by isolated
sea-robbers, which  rendered  all mediaeval commerce
so dangerous.
  The  works  of Constantine  Porphyrogenitus  are
even more interesting than those of his father.  His
treatise  called  " On  the Themes " is  invaluable  to
the  historian,  as   it gives  a complete   list  of  the
Themes, their boundaries, inhabitants, characteristics,
and resources, with some other incidental notices of
value.   Still more  important  is the book, " On  the
Administration  of  the  Empire,"  which  contains
directions  for the  foreign  policy  of the realm, and
sketches  the condition and  resources cf the various
nations with whom the Constantinopolitan government
had dealings.  Constantine also wrote a biography of
his  grandfather, Basil  the Macedonian,  couched  in
 terms of respect which that hardy usurper was  far
from deserving.  But his longest and most ambitious
work was on Court Ceremonies, a manual of etiquette
and precedence, describing  the  official  hierarchy of
 the empire,  its duties and  privileges, and containing
 elaborate  directions  for the conduct of state  cere-
 monials and the interior economy of the royal house-
 hold. On this comparatively trifling topic Constantine
 spent  far more pains than on the works of  larger
 interest which he composed.  His books show him to
 have been a man of no great  originative faculty, but

[PDF p. 247]
            DECAY OF LETTERS.            221

gifted with the powers of a careful and methodical
compiler, who loved details and never shirked trouble.
His care for court pageants was very characteristic of
the  peaceful  emperor, who had long been  kept  at
home by  his  guardian, and  forced  to  compensate
himself by ceremonial for the want of real power.
  The  fact  that two  successive  emperors  devoted
themselves to  literary work  is a sufficient sign  that
by the end of the ninth century the times of intellec-
tual  dearth  and  destitution  which  had  so  long
prevailed were now  at an  end.  From the death of
Justinian to the end of the Heraclian dynasty matters
grew  gradually  worse   ;  from  the  rise  of Leo  the
Isaurian onward they began slowly to improve.  The
darkest age  in Byzantine  literary history was from
about 600 to 750, a period  in which we have hardly
any contemporary annalists, no poetry save the lost
 Heracliad of George of Pisidia, and very little even of
theology.   Literature seemed absolutely dead at the
accession of the Isaurians, but the quickening influence
of the reforms of the great Leo seems to have been
felt  in that province as  in every other.  By the end
of the eighth century writers were far more numerous,
though many  of them  were only anti-Iconoclastic
controversialists, like Theodore Studita.  By the ninth
century we can trace the existence of a much larger
literary class, and  find a few really first-rate authors,
such as the patriarch Photius (857-69), whose learning
and  width  of  culture  was  astonishing, and whose
 library-catalogue is the envy of modern scholars.
   Perhaps  the  most   interesting  development  of
 Byzantine  literature were the epics, or Romances of