[PDF p. 358]
                XXVI.

         THE END OF A LONG TALE.

                    (1370-1453.)

 The tale of the last seventy-five years of the Byzan-
tine Empire is a mere piece of local  history, and no
longer forms an important thread  in the web of the
history of Christendom.  Murad the Turk might have
taken Constantinople in 1370, without altering in any
very great measure the course of events  in Eastern
Europe during the next century.  For after 1370 the
empire ceased  to  exercise  its old  function of " bul-
wark of Christendom against the Ottomite."  That
duty now fell to the Servians and Hungarians, who
continued to discharge  it for the next hundred and
fifty years. The Paleologi, by their base subservience
to the Turk, protracted the life of the empire long after
 all justification for its existence had disappeared.
   If Constantinople had  fallen  in  1370,  instead  of
 1453,  there arc only two ways  in which European
 history would have been somewhat modified.  The
 commercial  resources of Genoa  and Venice would
 have been straitened before the appointed time, and

[PDF p. 359]
        REIGN OF JOHN PALEOLOGUS.       333

ere the Cape route to India enabled Europe to dis-
pense with the use of Constantinople as half-way house
to  the East.   And, we may add,  the Renaissance
would have been shorn of some of its brilliance in the
next century,  if the  dispersion of the Greeks had
taken place before Italy was quite  fitted  to  receive
them and turn  their learning  to  account.   But  in
other respects it is hard to see that much harm would
have resulted from the  fall of Constantinople in the
end of the fourteenth rather than the middle of the
fifteenth century.
  While Murad  I. was conquering the Servians and
Bulgarians, John Paleologus was dragging out a long
and unhonoured old age.  His  reign was protracted
for over half a century, but his later years were much
vexed by the  undutiful behaviour  of  his  children.
His son Andronicus twice rebelled against him, and
once succeeded in seizing the throne for a short space.
Andronicus  allied himself  unto  Saoudji,  a  son of
Murad L, who plotted a similar treason against  his
father  the  Emir.   But Murad  easily  quelled  the
rebellion, put out the eyes of his own  son, and sent
Andronicus  in  chains to John  H., bidding him  to
follow his example.  The Emperor did not dare to
disobey, and  ordered  his son  to be  blinded.  But
the  operation was  so  ineffectually performed  that
Andronicus retained a measure of sight, and was even
able to venture on a second rebellion against his father.,,
   In consequence of his heir's unnatural conduct, the
aged John determined to deprive him of his succes-
sion, and when he died in  1 391, he left the throne to
his second son Manuel, and  not to  his eldest  born.

[PDF p. 360]
334             ^^^^^'  '^'^'^^   <^^'' ^  L(Ji\G TALE,

Manuel  II. was above the average of the Paleologi,
and showed some signs of capacity, but of what  use
was  it to a prince whose  sole dominions were Con-
stantinople, Thessalonica, and the Peloponnesus ?  He
had  neither military strength nor money  to justify
rebellion against the Turk, and could only wait on
the course of events.
  There was, however, one moment  in Manuel's life
at  which  the  liberation  of the  empire  from  the
Ottoman  suzerainty  appeared  possible  and  even
probable.   In  1402, there burst  into Asia Minor a
great  horde  of  Tartars, under the celebrated con-
queror  Timour  [Tamerlane].   Sultan  Bayezid, the
successor of Murad   I., went  forth  to withstand  the
invader.   But  at Angora  in  Galatia, he suffered a
crushing defeat, and  the Ottoman Empire  seemed
likely  to perish by the sword.   Bayezid  was  cap-
tured,  his  trusty Janissaries were  cut  to pieces,  his
light horsemen scattered  to the winds.  The Tartars
swarmed all over Asia Minor, occupied  Broussa, the
Ottoman capital, and restored to their thrones all the
Seljouk  Emirs  whose  dominions  Murad    I.  had
annexed,   Bayezid  died  in  captivity, and  his sons
began to fight over the remains of his empire   : Prince
Suleiman seized Adrianople, Prince Eesa Nicaea, and
each declared himself Sultan.
  This was a rare opportunity for Manuel Paleologus  :
the  thieves had  fallen  out, and  the  rightful owner
might perchance come again to his own,  if he played
his cards  well.  The  control of the  Straits was of
great importance to each of the Turkish pretenders,
so much so, that Manuel was able to  sell  his  aid  to

[PDF p. 361]
             TURKISH CIVIL WARS.           335

 Suleiman for a heavy price.   In order to keep Eesa
 from crossing the water, the holder of the European





           MANUEL PALEOLOGUS AND HIS FAMILY.
                  {From a Co7ttemporary AIS.)
 {From  '' UArt Byzantin"  Par C. Bayet.   Paris, Quantin, 1883.)
half of the Ottoman realm ceded  to the Emperor

[PDF p. 362]
^^6      THE END OF A LONG TALE.

Thessalonica, the lower valley of the Strymon, the
coast of Thessaly, and  all    " the seaports of the Black
Sea from the mouth of the Bosphorus up to Varna.
  For a moment Manuel once more rul6d what might
in courtesy be called an empire, and so long  as the
Ottomans were occupied in civil war he contrived to
retain his gains.  The  strife of the sons of Bayezid
lasted ten years   : Suleiman was  slain by his brother
Musa, Eesa by his brother Mohammed, and the two
supplanters  continued  the  war.  By  all  Oriental
analogies their empire ought to have fallen to pieces,
for it is very much easier to build up a new state in
the East than to keep together an old one which is
breaking asunder.   But Mohammed, the  youngest
of the sons of Bayezid, was  a man  of genius   : he
triumphed over the last of his brothers, and united all
the remnants of the Ottoman realm  that remained.
Much had been  lost  to the Seljouk Emirs  in Asia
Minor, and to the Servians and Manuel Paleologus in
Europe, but the rest was back in Mohammed's hands
byA.D. 142 1.  Manuel had very luckily cast in his lot
with Mohammed during the later years of the Turkish
civil war, and his ally let him enjoy the dominions he
had recovered by his original treaty with Suleiman in
1403.
  Between 1402 and 142 1, Europe had an unparalleled
opportunity to rid herself of the Ottomans.  Unfor-
tunately   it  was  not  taken.   Sigismund,  king  of
Hungary, and  at the same time Emperor, was  the
sovereign on whom the duty of leading the attack
ought  to  have  fallen.   But  Sigismund  was  now
engaged  in  his  great struggle with the Hussites  in

[PDF p. 363]
     MURAD  II. ATTACKS CONSTANTINOPLE.   337

Bohemia.  This wretched  religious war directed the
strength of Hungary northward when  it was wanted
in the south.  Without such a power  to back them
the Servians, though they recovered their own liberty
as a result of the battle of Angora, could do nothing
towards driving the Turks from the Balkans.  There
was never any sympathy between Serb and Magyar,
and save under the direct pressure of fear of a Moslem
invasion they would hot act together.  The Hungarian
kings had always laid claim to a suzerainty over the
crown of Servia, and from time to time tried to con-
vert their neighbours to Roman Catholicism by force
of arms.  Hence there was no love lost between them,
and a crusade to expel the Turks was never concerted.
  Mahomet the Unifier died  in 142 1, and  evil days
at once set in for Constantinople and for Christendom,
when his ambitious son Murad H. came to the throne.
Manuel Paleologus was one of the  first  to  feel the
change in the times.  He tried to make trouble for
Murad, by supporting against him two claimants to the
Ottoman Sultanate, each named Mustapha, one the
uncle, the other the brother of the new ruler.  This
drew down on the empire  the  fate which had been
delayed  since  1370:  the  Sultan  declared war on
Manuel, took one after another all the fortresses which
had been recovered by the peace of 1403, and  finally
laid siege to Constantinople.  For the  last time the
walls of the city proved strong enough to repulse an
assault.   Though  Murad   levelled   against  them
cannon, then seen for the first time  in the East, built
Oiovable towers to  shelter  his troops, and launched
his  terrible Janissaries  to the assault, he could not

[PDF p. 364]
             ARAlItSfjUK DESICN IKOM A HYZANTINE MS.
{^Froni   ''• L'Art Byzaitti)!.''''  Par Charles Bayet.   Paris, Quantin, iS8j.

[PDF p. 365]
           DEATH OF MANUEL  II.           339

 succeed.  The  report of a miraculous vision  of the
 Virgin, who  vouchsafed  to  reveal  herself  as  the
 defender of the city, encouraged the Greeks to  resist
 with a better spirit than might have been  expected.
 At last  the pretender Mustapha, whom Manuel had
 supplied with money  to cause a revolt against  his
 brother, began to stir up such trouble  in Asia Minor,
 that the Sultan determined  to  raise the  siege and
 march  against him.  He granted Manuel peace, on
 the condition that he ceded  all  his dominions save
 the  cities of Constantinople  and Thessalonica  and
 the Peloponnesian province.  Thus  the empire once
 more sank back  into a  state of  vassalage  to  the
 Ottomans [1422].
   Manuel  II. died  three years  after,  at the age of
 seventy-seven.  He was the  last sovereign  of Con-
 stantinople who won  even  a  transient  smile from
 fortune.  The  tale of the  last thirty  years  of the
 empire is one of unredeemed gloom.
  To Manuel succeeded  his son  John  VI., whose
 whole reign was passed in peace, without an attempt
 to shake  off the Turkish  yoke  ;  such an attempt
 indeed would have been hopeless, unless backed by
 aid from  without.  As Manuel  II. once  observed,
 " the empire now requires a bailiff not a statesman to
 rule it."   Treaties, wars, and  alliances were not  for
 him  :  all that he could do was to try to save a  little
 money, and to keep his walls in good repair, and even
 these humble tasks were not always feasible.
   All  the  descriptions  of  Constantinople   in  the
.iifteenth century, whether  written by Greek natives
 or by Western  travellers, bear witness to a  state of

[PDF p. 366]
340       THE END OF A LONG TALE.

exhaustion and debility which make us wonder that
the empire did not collapse sooner.  The country out-
side the walls was a desert.  Within them more than
half the ground was unoccupied, and covered only by
ruins which  testified  to  alQcient magnificence.  The
great palace by the Augustaeum, which sheltered so
many generations of emperors, had grown so dilapi-
dated that the Paleologi dwelt in a mere corner of  it.
Part of the porticoes of St. Sophia had  fallen down,
and the Greeks could not  afford  to repair even  the
greatest sanctuary of their faith.  The population of
the  city had shrunk  to about a hundred thousand
souls, most of them dwelling in great poverty.  Such
commerce and wealth as  still survived in Constanti-
nople had passed almost  entirely into the hands of
the  Italians of Genoa  and  Venice, whose  fortified
factories at Galata and Pera now contained the bulk
of the wares  that passed  through  the  city.  The
military strength  of the empire was  composed  of
about four thousand mercenary troops, of whom many
were Franks and hardly any were born  subjects of
the empire.  The splendid court, which had once been
the wonder of East and West, had shrunk  to such
modest dimensions that a Burgundian traveller noted
with surprise that no more  than  eight  attendants
accompanied the empress when she went  in  state to
worship in St. Sophia.^
  John  VI.,  in  spite of the caution with which he
avoided all action, was destined to see the empire lose
its most important possession  beyond  the  walls of

     * See Bertrandon de la Broquiere quoted in Finlay, vol.  iii. p. 493,
a very interesting passage.

[PDF p. 367]
          yOHN  VI. AT FLORENCE.          34I

Constantinople.   His brother Andronicus, governor
of  Thessalonica, traitorously sold that  city  to  the
Venetians for 50,000 zecchins.  The Sultan, incensed
at a transfer of Greek  territory having taken  place
without  his permission, pounced down on the place,
expelled the Venetians and annexed Thessalonica to
the Ottoman Empire [1430].
  The  chief feature  of the  reign of the  last  John
Paleologus was his attempt to win aid for the empire
by  enlisting  sympathy  in  Western  Europe.  He
determined  to conform to Roman Catholicism and
to throw  himself on  the  generosity  of the  Pope.
Accordingly he betook himself to Italy in  1438, with
the Patriarch of Constantinople and many bishops in
his train.  He appeared at the Councils of Ferrara and
Florence, and \\as solemnly received into the Roman
Church  in the Florentine Duomo, on July  6,  1439.
It  had  apparently  escaped   John's   notice   that
Eugenius IV., the pope of his own day, was  a very
different personage from  the  great  pontiffs  of the
eleventh  and  twelfth  centuries, who were able  to
depose sovereigns and send  forth Crusades at  their
good pleasure.   Since the Great Schism the papacy
had  been  hopelessly  discredited   in  Christendom.
Eugenius  IV. was engaged  in waging a defensive
war against the Council of Basle, which was attempt-
ing to depose him, and had  little thought or power
to spend on aiding the Eastern Christians.  All that
John could get from him was a sum of money and a
body of three hundred mercenary troops.  This was a
poor return for his journey and conversion.
  Only one thing of importance was accomplished by